---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/complex-integration-of-multiple-brain-systems/"}
---

Complex Integration of Multiple Brain Systems was developed by **Beatriz Sheldon, MEd, and Albert Sheldon, MD**. A novel and innovative therapeutic paradigm, CIMBS provides many practical and understandable explanations for the complexity of our emotions and emotional behaviors. This practical knowledge can be useful to any person whether they are part of the helping professions or not, and goes hand in hand with mindful approaches to life and to all forms of treatment. It integrates knowledge from various fields such as neuroscience, attachment theory, affect regulation, developmental psychology, and mindfulness practices. CIMBS is the love child of two conventionally trained therapists that felt the need to break away from the mainstream, and even popular alternative, approaches towards therapeutic practice.

Beatriz was born South of the border and started out slicing and staining rat brains in the neurology department of the University of Mexico. She originally aspired to become a neurosurgeon. After finishing a degree in Psychology, Beatriz received a scholarship to continue graduate school anywhere in the world. Her family was thoroughly against this. A Mexican woman in the 1970's was not supposed to leave her family, her country, and her fiancé to go study abroad. They all told her to just get married and have kids, that she would never make it to her career. Beatriz ignored the hecklers attempts at advice and continued forward, enrolling at McGill University in Montreal Canada to earn a masters degree in educational psychology. After watching Dr. Habib Davanloo demonstrate videos of Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy(ISTDP), Beatriz was inspired. Instead of following the road most often traveled, studying Cognitive Behavioral Therapy, Psychodynamic Therapy, Solution Focused Psychotherapy, etc, Beatriz wanted to go down this alternative path. The only problem? Unfortunately, the program was only accepting male psychotherapists. Beatriz camped outside Davanloo's office for 3 days, petitioning the status quo and pleading her case. He finally decided to accept her. Eventually, Beatriz moved to Vancouver BC and established a successful therapy practice. She continued to visit Montreal regularly for training, and over the next 15 years, taught what she had learned - Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy. She joined the West Coast international ISTDP Institute faculty, and was labeled "the therapist to call when you are stuck with a patient." Thing were well, but she became increasingly aware that something was missing. Beatriz felt there was a greater healing potential for her patients that she couldn't figure out how to access. She began to experiment by being more connected to who she was working with. Beatriz would audibly declare positive feelings towards her patients, and welcome their positive feelings back, explicitly making the caring nature of their relationship visible. Some of her colleagues were visibly uncomfortable with this practice of "caring out loud," fearful that she may be overstepping therapeutic boundaries and making her patients dependent. Beatriz was told "That is wrong!" and "You don't say those things out loud," but what began to happen demonstrated that the opposite was true. Patients were empowered to form intimate relationships in their day to day lives, needing their once-a-week therapy less and less. She knew that she was onto something.

Albert began to distance himself from the friends he had in high school as he followed various quirks of fate. Rather than aligning with his natural bent towards economics, language, and philosophy, Albert decided that he would study the natural sciences. He went to medical school in order to learn the skills that would allow him to intimately interact with multiple cultures around the world. It was there that he became interested in the doctor-patient relationship, choosing to go into family practice while the majority of his classmates chose to specialize. Albert began working for Doctors without Borders in the rural Bolivian Altiplano of South America. His patients only spoke their indigenous language Aymara. When asking a translator questions to learn about their concerns or symptoms, the answers that came back had no relevance to the intention of his inquiries. They came from a culture that viewed illness in a very different manner than we do, the medical history and description of symptoms was either misleading or useless, and verbal communication was essentially impossible. Lab tests were not a possibility. Albert realized that he would have to rely completely on clinical observations and their physical exam. Through fine tuning, based on just the physical exam alone, he was able to test a wide range of biological capacities. These tests mobilized innate physiological shifts, revealing the underlying function of different biological systems in the body. Physiological phenomenon, subtle or not so subtle, became the key to understanding his patient's illnesses and what might be helpful in treating them. In the same way that a blind man develops extra-sensory hearing, Albert naturally became adept at seeing subtleties. He learned to read the story that the patients body would tell. He developed relational skills that allowed him to develop a bedside manner, becoming comfortable with patients pain and the incoherence of their illnesses. He was beginning to develop wisdom around what was later to be learned as nonconscious phenomena. His experiences as a primary care physician, enjoying the relationships with patients, inspired him to learn more about mental health and further specialize in psychiatry. In residency he chose to specialize as a psychotherapist. Afterwards, he pursued multiple types of training, including cognitive-behavioral therapy, psychoanalytic, psychodynamic, systems-centered, group, interpersonal, hypnosis, and some forms of experimental therapy. As part of this exploration process, Albert attended a course on Intensive Short-Term Dynamic Psychotherapy presented by Dr. Davanloo at McGill. Rather than talking, Davanloo would show video recordings of sessions that demonstrated the effectiveness of active interventions. Albert was inspired by this, and Davanloo's scientific approach to therapy in general, and joined a small training group that would meet for a week 4 times a year in Montreal. It was around this time that he became a part of the Bush Medical Fellowship program and began a research project on the precise details of the psychotherapeutic process.                                           
One of these years, due to circumstances, what we could perhaps preclude as the workings of the universal synchronistic function, Albert had to miss the first day of the meeting. When he arrived on the second day, to a full conference room, the only place for him to sit was in the empty seat next to Beatriz, who's friend faced an emergency and had to depart early. Over the next four days, getting to know one another, they adhered to this cosmically ordained seating chart and found themselves comparing notes. They immediately noticed that they shared a common outlook, both observing that much more was going on in the video recordings of the sessions than what was being addressed during the presentations. It seemed as though the teacher was getting locked into their own method of addressing the trauma and not paying attention to the other possibilities present for a patient in the moment. The two of them made a deal to explore these aspects and study their own sessions before they attended the next annual meeting.

Over the next couple years, Beatriz and Albert would meet up and continue their discussions. They would have brainstorming sessions that were heated, both having strong opinions and the experience to back up their viewpoints. They came from different cultures, backgrounds, and therapeutic trainings, but eventually came to learn that their contrasting viewpoints all had merit. There was so much more to learn.

Beatriz and Albert originally met at a scientific conference and found an immediate synergy with one another(bow chicka bow-wow). 


They came from different cultures, backgrounds, and therapeutic trainings, but were able to find an ability to channel wisdom which combined their diverse experiences. They had a shared ability to see therapeutic phenomenon and opportunities that their colleagues did not. This synergy lead them to discover and uncover profound sources of energy and knowledge within their patients that were completely nonconscious and had escaped detection previously. 

The two of them experimented with interventions based on what was being observed, and at first, it seemed impossible to describe what they were discovering. Within the first 20 minutes of a therapy session, they could create remarkable changes in patients, observable moves forward which sustained between sessions. 

Trying to understand what was unfolding in the brains and minds of their patients, Beatriz and Albert turned to studying the science of neurobiology and affective neuroscience. What they found was both simple and profound. Neuroscience literature had revealed to them the existence of "brain systems," established neural circuits that perform dedicated physical and behavioral functions. By doing some digging, they were able to discover brain systems that appeared relevant to their patients strengths and difficulties. Some of the most important of these systems were operating mostly out of their patients awareness, aspects of their nonconscious, but were accessible to be worked with in treatment. Over time, they developed numerous practical ways to mobilize the energy and wisdom which was stored within these nonconscious emotional brain systems(which we are all born with). They found that by harnessing these many emotional brain systems, they could not only help provide treatment for their patients difficulties, but enable them to change the trajectory of their entire lives. As they were working with patients, Beatriz and Albert were able to access their own nonconscious emotional brain systems, freeing themselves to become more fulfilled and effective in their work as-well.

After over two decades of practice and empirical clinical research, Beatriz and Albert expanded and organized their methodology into an innovative therapeutic paradigm that they call Complex Integration of Multiple Brain Systems, or CIMBS. Once you get past the novelty in understanding and embracing the emotional brain systems, the effectiveness and potential of this model will become quite clear. In comparison to other models, CIMBS stands out as being at the forefront of integrating our most advanced scientific understanding of how the mind, body, and emotions work together. While other therapies incorporate aspects of science and neuroscience, CIMBS excels in utilizing every element of what we know to facilitate comprehensive healing and transformation. This makes it one of the most sophisticated approaches available today for working with complex psychological, emotional, and relational issues.

CIMBS helps clients gain awareness of their present-moment experience, allowing for real-time integration of emotional, cognitive, and physiological processes. This focus on dynamic, moment-to-moment engagement is rare among therapeutic models. As I was going through the book, it was quite interesting to me that deep presence, on the therapists part, was one of the largest driving forces behind the models success. Through the cultivation of presence and awareness, traits which are heavily focused upon in spiritual traditions, the therapist is able to use their focus like a laser beam to creatively untangle brain systems which are wired in an unsavory manner. This untangling then releases a tremendous amount of energy and naturally equips the patients innate resources to reorganize the structure of the brain in favorable ways. Is the disentanglement of hyper or hypo-neural subcortical brain regions similar to the releases of kundalini referenced to in Eastern traditions? 
	See [[Kundalini & Chakra Lotuses\|Kundalini & Chakra Lotuses]]




Potential Cuts / Additions 

She was not well versed in the English language, many of the essays and tests were incredibly difficult for her. Nonetheless, she made it through (after sweating bullets and shedding tears), reflecting that, given the chance she probably wouldn't do it again. "It was very courageous and a little bit crazy."