---
{"dg-publish":true,"permalink":"/mantra-and-bija-seed-sounds/"}
---

Across the globe and throughout history, cultures have recognized and harnessed the transformative power of sound. While the specific forms and philosophies may differ, the underlying principle remains consistent: certain sounds, when uttered with intention and devotion, can serve as potent tools for healing, spiritual growth, connection with others, and inner experience. 

In the realm of **Christianity**, the ethereal melodies of **Gregorian Chants**, often sung in Latin, have long been used in liturgical settings. A liturgical setting is a song which is set to an ancient text and sung during worship to reinforce a specific part of the service. 

Similarly, we see in the **Jewish** tradition **cantillation**, a mode of intonation used in the public recital of prayers and Holy Scripture. Cantillation uses specific note patterns to add an additional layer of meaning and musical expression to the words. 

Moving east, the mystical Islamic tradition of Sufism offers another compelling example. **Sufi Dhikr**, Dhikr meaning ”**the remembrance of God**,” involves the rhythmic repetition of God's names or sacred phrases. This practice is often accompanied by movement and breathwork. 

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bjZqvy_aMRU

We can also see examples within Native American cultures, different shamanistic traditions, and tribes across the world.

Here we stumble upon a universal truth that transcends cultural boundaries - people are moved by sound and repetition has tremendous value. 

All religions have created mantras and daily recitations — often short distilled phrases that are easy to recall and recite daily. These become the tiny anchoring points that help one to deal with the fluid vicissitudes of life. What is spoken automatically and subliminally sinks it’s way into the non-conscious mind, guiding someone towards the core principles of their faith. Repetition makes our feet sink deeper into the sand. Neuroplasticity allows us to connect to the feeling state of whatever you are repeating after it has become engrained in your brains wiring over time. Your non-conscious mind will build out, and then be trained, at faster and faster speeds, to regularly access dendrite trees and associated schemas which are linked with the subject of repetition, therefore eventually being able to bring these ideas and associated memories/energy into the conscious mind on a whim. You begin to, as you chant, step into mental and then energetic resonance with what you are repeating. The conscious mind utilizes the mantra as an anchor point, the non-conscious mind then begins to organize itself around this anchor, bringing up different internal ques which seek to drive the conscious into the state which the nonconscious has been trained to hold via this pathway. 

Delving deeper into the origins of mantras, we find that the earliest known instances appear in a the Vedas, ancient Indian scriptures written in Sanskrit dating back to 1500-1200 BCE. These sacred texts contain hymns and verses that were chanted during religious rituals and ceremonies. Over time, mantras evolved beyond their Vedic origins and became integral to various Asian religions, including Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism, and Sikhism. This is no mere coincidence, but a testament to the fundamental power inherent in vibration itself. Sound, at its core, is energy, and specific frequencies have the capacity to resonate with our physical, emotional, and spiritual being. From this understanding arises the concept of mantra – carefully constructed sounds and syllables that, when repeated with intention, can harness this vibrational power to effect profound transformation within and around us.

Sanskrit is more than just a language; it's considered by many to be one of the actual building blocks of reality, divinely constructed. Saṃskṛta (संस्कृत) itself means “sanctified” or “purified”. It is apaurusheya - not created by man, and revered as dēvabhāṣā, the language of the gods. Each letter, or _akshara_, is believed to house its own _shakti_ – an aspect of the divine feminine energy, and belongs to one of the five elements (earth, water, fire, wind or space). Its fifty letters, from a to kṣa, arc the fifty basic vibrations of the Cosmos. When you speak a letter, you're not just making a sound; you're releasing that specific _shakti_. You're connecting to and emitting a particular broadband frequency within the energy of god. This released _shakti_ then embarks on a journey. It travels through what's called _chidakasam_ – the boundless space of consciousness, often associated with Shiva. As the _shakti_ moves through this ethereal realm, it generates _spanda_ – divine vibrations. These vibrations are the subtle, underlying forces that shape and influence the world around us. Mahadevi/Adi Parashakti is the personification of supreme primordial feminine formless energy. The original divine power and primeval spiritual energy of the cosmos. In tandem with Shiva, the masculine principle, the two combine to create the universe. Adishakti gets further divided into 10 Mahavidyas. She is sooo vast, so encompassing, that her totality cannot be grasped through a single form or name. This is why we encounter a pantheon of goddesses within Hinduism, each being a unique expression of the one divine feminine. Kali is often viewed as one of the most prominent and potent of these manifestations. In certain Shakta traditions, particularly within the Kalikula (Family of Kali) school, Kali _is_ Mahadevi; she _is_ the totality of Adi Parashakti herself. She is depicted with a necklace of skulls(mundamala), sometimes freshly severed heads, encompassing her neck. While this garland holds place as a reminder of the cyclical nature of life, death, and rebirth, as well as Kali's power over these forces(showing off the demons she has slain, representing negative aspects of the ego), the fifty skulls (or sometimes fifty-one) are also said to represent the fifty letters of the Sanskrit alphabet. She is adorned with the alphabet of creation, which she, in her creative aspect, brought into being. As the force of dissolution, she draws those same letters, the bricks which constructed the house of reality, back into Her essence. Kali is also depicted as **dancing all over creation**. This dance represents the movement of cosmic vibration. The Universe is this movement. The Letters are the sound of particular movements, which Kālī, the Source of movement, wears around Her neck. Sanskrit offers a way to connect with the divine through sound. Speaking these sacred letters isn't just talking; it's participating in creation itself. It is a deeply powerful way to connect language and speech with ontology and metaphysics.

As described in the Vedas, the original abode of the Mantra was the Paramākāśa or primaeval ether, the eternal and immutable substratum of the universe, out of which, in the uttering of the primal sound "Vach", the universe itself was created. Vāc (वाच्) is a Sanskrit word referring to “speech”. Vach can be seen as the female Logos, the goddess of the active forces in nature, the Word, Voice, Language and Speech. Although prominent in the _Rig Veda_, Vach almost completely disappears from Hindu mythology. She is later associated with the river Goddess Saraswati, who absorbs many of Vach's attributes. The musical instrument (Vīnā), which Sarasvati holds denotes all sounds (Śabda), of which, she is the Mother. Vāc, as-well as Sarasvati and other goddesses, were precursors that contributed to the later development of Adishakti. Vach is the _concept_ of divine sound as a goddess, "she overflows with sweetness"(5.73.3) She is the source from which all sounds, including the great "AUM," emerge. She is the potentiality of sound before it manifests. Shabda-Brahman or Nada-Brahman, the highest, eternal and only true reality of sound. What Vak experiences, is that she is the mother of the universe, with all its gods and humans, everything created. She is the unexpressed idea of existence, in which, by her expression, takes visible form and being. She being the word unrefined, is prior to and more real than that which is expressed, yet still inextricably its whole. Vach is referred to as “Queen of the Gods,”(Rig Veda 8.89) or “the Mother of the Vedas.” She earned this title since it is through her power (as mystic speech) that Brahmâ revealed the Vedas, also owing to her the power that he used to produce the universe, through speech and words. It is said Vach enters into poets, writers, prophets, and sages; enabling them to hear, grasp, and reveal the truths of existence. To devise and create the texts, hymns, and rituals that express the reality of their internal visions. She bestows vision to the seers and gives wisdom to the wise, also lending us the amazing riches of language and thought. She is, however, much more than just speech. She includes the power of perception, grasping the nature of things, giving name to them, and expressing its structure with coherence, form, and clarity. Her nature is subtle and eternal.... incomprehensible, even if it is her whom helps us to comprehend all.....

No figure looms larger in the history of Sanskrit than the grammarian Panini(whom we know almost nothing about.) His understanding of the language's structure and the systematic approach he took to its grammar left the language "frozen." The perfection of Panini's model encouraged all proceeding authors to follow his grammatical rules, and resulted in the ancient Indians discarding his predecessors work. Eventually, adherence to Paninis guidelines became a sort of requirement if you wanted your writing to be understood. His one and only piece of work, the Ashtadhyayi (aṣṭādhyāyī), opens up with a collection of seventy seven aphorisms known as the "Shiva Sutras." Essentially, Panini hits the ground running with "Here are the 14 Shiva Sutras, now, let's use these to build a complete grammar of Sanskrit."

"The descriptive grammar of Sanskrit, which Pāṇini brought to its perfection, is one of the greatest monuments of human intelligence and an indispensable model for the description of languages."
- Leonard Bloomfield (American Linguist)

Once upon a time the Septirishis(original disciples of Shiva) met with their teacher at his abode on Mount Kailasha. Out of his desire to enlighten them, Shiva began to perform his cosmic dance(showing off), and at the end of it struck his Damaru(a small two-sided drum) 14 times. The 14 sounds/vibrations which reverberated were what came to be known as these Shiva Sutras. These sutras are scientific, grouped based on how and where they are articulated in the mouth (vowels first, then semivowels, nasals, stops, and fricatives etc.) From these formulations came the systematic derivation of the entire Sanskrit alphabet, all 50 letters. 

The second story which tells us of the origin of the aksharas takes place in the myth of Dakṣayajña. This tale primarily features Lord Shiva, his wife Sati Devi, and her father(the in-law) Daksha. Daksha wanted to conduct a grand Yajna, which is a devotional ritual done in front of a sacred fire, and he intentionally did not invite Sati Devi or Shiva. She showed up anyway; and to her dismay, during the event, Daksha began to insult and speak ill of Lord Shiva. Sati Devi felt utterly humiliated, and in response, she jumped into the fire of the Yajna immolating herself. When Shiva got word of this he flew into a rage, destroying the Yajna in his fierce form of Virabhadra. Unable to come out of his immense sorrow at the loss Sati Devi, he carried her body on his shoulders and began to wander aimlessly. This sorrowful Shiva roamed the universe in a nostalgic anguish with Sati’s corpse, leading to cosmic imbalance. Lord Vishnu was called upon to reinstate Shiva to some semblance of normalcy and calm him down. Vishnu made use of his Sudarshana chakra(kinda like a throwing star) to dismember Sati’s dead body, which then fell in 50 different places across India. Each of these 50 locations, known as Śakta Pīṭha's, are revered as sacred, with shrines dedicated to various forms of Adi Shakti, and ascribed one of the unique letters of the Sanskrit alphabet. The deities these shrines are dedicated to correspond to the siddhis(psychic powers) that each of the sounds can bestow. 

The seven primordial chakras of the human body, which are the junctions where life energy gathers and then branches out, are symbolized as _padmas_, or lotuses. Each one of these is represented as having a unique number of petals, which signify how many pathways branch out from it. _Muladhara_ chakra at the base has four petals, _Svadhisthana_ has six, _Manipura_ ten, _Anahata_ twelve, _Vishuddhi_ sixteen, and _Ajna_ chakra has two. The total number of these petals adds up to 50, with their individual aspects each corresponding to the sounds of the Sanskrit alphabet. _Aksharamala Japam_ is a process in Tantra where these sounds are chanted in a specific sequence to activate the seventh and the final chakra called _Sahasrara_, the 1000 petal lotus.

In the same way that Geologists use seismic surveys and other methods to locate areas that may contain oil, the rishis were able to hear the subtle music of the cosmos through deep inner awareness.  This profound receptivity, honed through years of meditation(perhaps many lifetimes), allowed them to perceive potent energies hidden within the fabric of reality. Like prospectors of the soul, they codified these vibrations into mantras, powerful sound formulas that could be used as a sonic pathway to divine energy. They were able to discern the Bija sounds, the most fundamental manifestations of primordial sound. 

"When the mind becomes attuned, it becomes capable of hearing the voice of the unknown. The sounds which are heard in such a stage do not belong to any particular language, religion or tradition.” - Swami Rama









Like a url code in the browser of your mind, bringing you to a specific website, you can use your *attention* to establish a dial up **connection** to a particular energy within the vast web of existence. Through repetition you are wiring a direct doorway within your brain, placing it in your Bookmarks bar. The more popular mantras are thought of to have a reserve of energy that the collective has poured into it over the centuries, which you draw from while chanting. Tapping into what could be viewed as rich oil fields of the etheric world, mantras may be a method to generate tremendous inner wealth.

One can create for themselves, through mantra, their own experience of the therapeutic reconsolidation process. Firstly, you would have to have at-least some awareness of the origin story which a certain unwanted set of emotions/behaviors are stemming from. This may be incredibly difficult for someone who is currently in the trenches of mental warfare to do on their own, and may require insight from a trained professional. I'm not attempting to overstep the complexities of therapy, but I do believe that someone could replicate much of the process on their own(after learning about themselves or the knowledge therapists work from.) Self directing the reconsolidation process by first observing the unwanted feeling state in the body, then bringing up all the memories surrounding it, and finally using mantra with its associated truth as contradictory towards the emotional learning within. A carefully chosen mantra, perhaps a self-constructed affirmation that targets a specific neuronal arrangement within your brain, can serve as a powerful anchor to a desired emotional state, belief, or sense of self. This could be an affirmation of strength, peace, self-compassion, or any other quality that contradicts the negative emotions associated with the targeted memory. When a negative emotional memory is retrieved, simultaneously engaging with the mantra (through repetition, focused attention, and energetic resonance with its meaning) can create the necessary "prediction error" for the juxtaposition experience. The positive empowering state evoked by the mantra, perhaps aided by aligning oneself with the vibrational science of Sanskrit, clashes with the expected negative emotions associated with the memory. 

